# Formative Study Analysis: Digital Illustration
### Raphael Radna<br>MAT-594X W20<br>February 25th, 2020

### Introduction
This analysis is the result of formative research investigating the practices of artists working with digital technology. Two artists were interviewed in order to learn about how and why they employ technology in their processes, and to develop a sense of what they see as the benefits and limitations of their chosen tools. We probe the dichotomies between working with manual and computational processes to reveal the aspects of each that artists value most highly in order to inform the design criteria of creative technologies, with a special focus on considerations relevant to digital drawing applications.

### Interview 1
The first interview was conducted with Sam, a graduate student working in computation arts, most recently with physical computing. She became attracted to programming as a medium to create and explore virtual scenarios, and currently continues this work through sculpture, installation, and performance. Her hybrid practice requires work with physical materials, the properties of which must be discovered through experimentation during prototyping. This injects risk into the process through an element of time-sensitivity that is absent when working with digital media alone. Additionally, physical materials embed symbolic meanings that she uses in her work, an example being the choice of silicone for a sculpture addressing the female body. She notes that these sorts of connotations don't seem to exist for digital tools and materials, and if they do, they tend to be more technical than culturally referential, with the notable exception of the open source software movement.

At the same time, physical tools are more immediate in their creative applications. For example, it is possible to sit down and begin drawing without a particular goal in mind; this is less possible in the case of programming. To be sure, programming is also a creative process, but since the programmer writes code to implement an idea, it is one with a greater degree of latency and teleological overhead. For this reason, Sam likes using drawing to ideate and iterate on design possibilities during the prototyping stage, even if the project only requires computational materials and methods. One technique she uses in this process is the design of propositional interfaces, which are drawn first, and then assigned functionality through reflection or else discarded. She values drawing for its unconstrained expressivity and immediacy, and views this as a highly creative component of her process.

Sam notes that programming can also be a useful tool for working through artistic problems, since it requires the formalization of the conceptual structure of a work, and provides the scaffolding on which the work is built. Still, its indirectness makes it less conducive to fast ideation, especially when thinking through aesthetic design possibilities. This can be mitigated to a degree by substituting software such as Photoshop or Illustrator, which she prefers to use with a pen interface in order to re-inject an element of direct manipulation. For her, this is a much-preferred alternative to the tediousness of drawing shapes through code; using the design knowledge embedded in physical gestures affords a more streamlined and enjoyable creative process, with added benefits of the digital domain such as increased precision and modifiability.

A limitation that Sam identifies in the design of this software is that only the drawing itself is direct: most functionality, such as selecting tools or modifying parameters, must be accessed using GUIs. For this reason, advanced users of these programs rely extensively on keyboard shortcuts, which can expedite workflow and minimize disengagement from the work. While this does improve things considerably, she is intrigued by the prospect of creative software in which the program interface can be controlled directly through gestural input.

### Interview 2
The second interview was conducted with Evelyn, an artist and educator working primarily in printmaking, sculpture, and installation by way of digital modeling and fabrication. Her primary tools include CNC machines, laser cutters, Illustrator, and Rhino, a CAD software that enables the simulation of a virtual space containing objects and materials at scale using realistic lighting conditions. She uses a variety of physical materials in her work, including plexiglass, plastic, wood, metal, holographic material, metallic inks, and LEDs.

Evelyn's process begins with conceptual and visual research, followed by a computer-modeling stage to generate an initial design of the work. From there, she produces a cardboard mockup via CNC routing or laser cutting, evaluates the result, then makes changes to the design, repeating this process as necessary before buying the real materials. She then proceeds by working with the materiality of the object, with special interest in processes that transform materials optically to seem like something other than what they are. To this end, her prototyping process includes material exploration by conducting tests on samples and evaluating their effects. She also uses specific lighting configurations to further manipulate the perception of materials, which can also be modeled in Rhino. Throughout this process, the computer acts as an object to think with: first by serving as an open environment to explore artistic concepts, and then by providing the ability to rapidly produce successive iterations of the work during the prototyping stage.

One potential pitfall of this process comes from the tension between design potentials and material properties; with Rhino, it is possible to design non-viable structures depending on the real-world material used. For that reason, the computer cannot be used without scrutiny. In these situations, Evelyn asserts that it is paramount to adhere to the tendencies of the material, and intervene by fine tuning aspects of the design or altering the lighting conditions as necessary.

In her work with Illustrator, Evelyn primarily uses the mouse. This is adequate for her purpose because she is working with outlines for laser-cutting or CNC, which requires manipulating points more than free-hand drawing. A preferred workflow involves scanning a design sketch and importing it into Illustrator to be tweaked further. A shortcoming of the program for this purpose is its tracing functionality, the way Illustrator recognizes scanned gestures. It frequently adds extraneous points, which need to be thinned manually. This is critical, especially when using the laser cutter, because if the machine attempts to cut points that are too close together, the heat can destroy some materials. 

Evelyn sees the value of digital tools in the ability to go beyond what is feasible with manual tools, such as the intricate cuts that a laser cutter is able to realize at superhuman rates. She reports that her modeling and fabrication process saves her a considerable sum in material costs. She also sees potentials for collaboration unique to the digital domain, given the ease of sharing CAD files, but notes that these come with the danger of intellectual property theft. Finally, she considers the biggest limitation of digital technology to be the cost of entry and corollary lack of access for underserved populations. As an art instructor, she has witnessed firsthand the effects of systemic cuts to art in public education.

### Discussion
In conducting these interviews, I was fortunate to converse with two high-caliber artists who have thought deeply about the ways they employ technology in their work. While neither artist is a digital illustrator as their primary practice, they are both experienced practitioners that use it at various stages in their processes; their reflections on digital drawing, along with the technical and conceptual insights I gained from learning about the non-drawing facets of their practices, will be helpful as I continue designing the drawing component of an in-progress software project.

Chief among these criteria is the value of direct manipulation, and the sense of immediacy and risk that it contributes to the creative process. Both Sam and Evelyn agree that the creative freedom afforded by physical drawing is unrivaled by its digital approximations, and while a drawing-tablet interface provides a good solution in many cases, it has its limitations, and is not appropriate for all workflows. Thinking about these issues, it occurred to me that I have only ever seen these devices used with a pen implement; I wonder if a set of dedicated implements in different shapes could mitigate some of these shortcomings, speeding up workflow in the same manner as keyboard shortcuts, while reducing some reliance on GUI.

From the discussions of material, and especially the significance of material investigations to the artist's processes, I have become aware of the value of imparting a sense of materiality to a digital drawing system. One way I imagine investigating this is to design virtual brushes that emulate the characteristic behaviors and aesthetics of physical material; for instance, could there be a water color tool with variable runniness? And would this kind of feature feel more engaging to work with? On the HCI side, I could imagine a pressure-sensitive surface that maps the pressure applied by the drawing implement to characteristics such as point size, color depth, and/or density (in the case of a granular representation). An interface for mixing color as a painter does could likewise further engage the user.

In response to Evelyn's experience with automatically tracing scanned drawings, I am beginning to consider the applications of computer vision to drawing software. While the value of a sophisticated gesture recognition function is apparent, there could be other potentials: mapping arbitrary input gestures to more complicated ones is just one example. Further study in this area may uncover more possibilities.

Finally, while I am currently designing a software project, these conversations have also inspired me to think about design possibilities for a low-cost input device for digital drawing. Without addressing any practical considerations, I am drawn to the idea of a system that somehow incorporates projection onto a surface; this could also enable a working area of variable dimensions.