# February 11th

As a platform for prototyping and conducting research through design, the Makey Makey offers several benefits. These include rapidity, as various implements can be connected to it quickly and with ease; flexibility, as any object can be connected to it so long as it is conductive; compatibility, since it emulates a standard keyboard interface (one of the few peripherals standardized accross virtually all personal computers); and availability, since it is a low-cost commercial product. It is such a conceptually simple device, that one can approach using it without a highly developed plan; its simplicity invites radical, improvisatory design. Also, since the Makey Makey is self-contained on one PCB and ships without a particular enclosure or set of attachments, it is relatively neutral when it comes to all but the most practical prototyping concerns; for this reason, it promotes the prioritization of the intended functionality of the system over aeshetic or other considerations. Compared to a board designed for a finished consumer product, the Makey Makey has much to offer an experimental designer; it is easy to read, has large holes for attaching alligator clips, and even includes touch points for direct use. All of these affordances offer a low-stakes design situation in which one can posit abstract self-reflective questions through design within a low risk environment. The major drawback of the Makey Makey in my view is that it offers only one type of control: a momentary on-off switch. The lack of other input modalities limits what designers might make using it.