# February 18th

In *Becoming Facilitators of Creative Computing in Out-of-School Settings*, Roque and Jain address the rewards and challenges of facilitating encounters with creative technology in informal settings, using phenomenological research methods to analyze a recurring constructionist workshop experience to arrive at a set of roles and attitudes for the ideal facilitator. Their work builds from the assumption that such an environment demands a different pedagogical approach from the traditional classroom, in which the goal is the acquisition of specific knowledge rather than creative expression through making. There are some formidable challenges in this area; the workshop attendees have varying levels of comfort with technology, and the facilitators have a range of backgrounds as well, coming from education, software development, and the humanities, among other fields. Using audiovisual documentation, interviews, and group discussion of their experiences, the facilitators probed the triumphs and short-comings of their involvement in the workshop.

In one case, it was necessary to unlearn the pressure to "know everything" commonly felt in a traditional teaching role; like any other collaboration, the facilitators found that they could lean on eachothers various proficiencies when faced with gaps in their own experience. Recognizing the limits of one's technical knowledge and seeking additional sources as necessary is an important component of the maker skillset. By becoming learners themselves, the facilitators effectively modeled the spirit and processes of exploratory tinkering that the workshop is intended to impart.

Additionally, they determined it critical that the facilitator be judicious in deciding when to intervene and when to stand aside during the workshop. They decided it best when interventions draw from the knowledge and skills of the individual whom they are engaging. One way of thinking about this is the directive to lead by asking questions rather than by giving answers, in order guide attendees to their own solutions. This is especially pertinent when confronting creative problems, since they never have a single "correct" outcome, and the method used to solve them signifficantly affects the aesthetic or functional result. Otherwise, there is a risk of "over-facilitating," in which the ideas of the facilitator are represented in the artifact, rather than those of the client. This is undesirable because it supplants opportunities for discovery and growth.

The impressions expressed by Do and Gross in *Environments for Creativity – A Lab for Making Things* are largely in accordance with the conclusions of the previous paper. They define creativity simply as the ability to create things; it is accessible to all, and best taught through pracice after prior training with domain-specific materials and processes. They affirm the social component of learning by emphasizing the benefits of a shared creative space, something which the workshop also provides, but which is absent from many academic departments. They also acknowledge a distinction between traditional instruction and creativty facilitation, and identify play as the defining element of the latter. In constrast to the model of collaboration among experts from distinct domains (used e.g. by the facilitators in the first article), they encourage creative practitioners to become proficient in any or all fields relevant to their work in what they term the Leonardo model. This strikes me as quite aspirational, especially in projects involving several technical fields.

I relate strongly to the concept of designing from one's "wants"; designing technologies that I would like to use myself has been a common motivation in my work. Developing technology this way has the benefits of a small feedback loop between ideation and iteration, and a sustained incentive for continuous progress. In turn, the desire for this technology and the work conducted to bring it about results in learning processes to gain the knowledge and skills required to advance the project. In my experience, the state of being engrossed in such a project does feel poetic, in the sense that there is a feeling or intention to be conveyed, and it is incumbent to express it through any/all available means.