# February 13th

The commonality between the issues discussed in *Epistemological Pluralism* and *The Promise of Empathy* lies in the importance of considering perspectives outside of our own as designers. By making the effort to understand the lived experiences of others with respect to the way they interact with technology, we increase our chances of designing devices, applications, and pedagogies that appeal and are accessible to users of a broad range of capabilities and predispositions.

There are certainly pitfalls to avoid in this endeavor; though well-intentioned, the clinical way in which traditional "empathy-building" activities are described in *The Promise of Empathy* feels dehumanizing to me. While it is necessary to collect information about people with disabilities in order to better design for their needs, "observation" and "simulation" are activities of the traditional scientific lab in which the goal is to discover empirical truth, and where empathy is likely not a primary concern. It seems reasonable to me that these methods could lead over time to the troubling implicit assumption of mutual exclusivity between designers and persons with disabilities. Designing for accessibility demands a more nuanced approach, in which the emphasis should be on understanding the experience of those with disabilities, instead of the designer's analysis of their experience with an artificial impairment. Otherwise, there is a strong risk of erasure of the experience of those whose contributions should no doubt be at the center of the discourse.

In *Epistemological Pluralism*, Turkle and Papert probe questions around the general conception of computing in our culture, and its ramifications on the way it is taught in our schools. The computer's pedigree as an engineering tool, and the supremacy given to this aspect of its identity, frequently leads to pedagogical systems that alienate those who are inclined towards more exploratory methods of learning and creating. The field of computation inherited this preference for the abstract over the concrete from gendered societal value systems that predate its development and pervade other scientific fields as well. Its negative effects are apparent in the way that people who think a certain way become discouraged from pursuing computing due to the incongruence between their style of assimilating knowledge and the prevailing method of disseminating it. While Turkle and Papert do not explicitly outline a strategy for addressing this problem, they acknowledge that, at the time of their writing, concrete computational paradigms were becoming widely adopted, citing the rise of iconographic interfaces and object-oriented programming.