# February 4th

###Ethnography
Ethnography could be useful in design research. By analyzing how experts in a specific domain approach the challenges unique to it, we might in turn reveal new insights in a separate domain. For instance, in *Lessons from the Woodshop*, studying how wood framers assessed their materials in order to select them for particular applications (e.g. avoiding knots in load-bearing beams) and developed special joining techniques to optimize structural integrity and maximize resources, revealed methods of introducing the element of time to design considerations. By necessity, crafts workers in this field learned to embrace the past and future of their materials, turning the inevitabilities of *vital decay* into opportunities to strengthen the structures they built while becoming more cognizant of the impact that their work has outside of their trade. The challenge then is to find how these lessons transfer to working with digital tools and materials, beyond considerations of the sustainability of the physical resources that they require.

###Collaboration
The research project described in *Hybrid Practice in the Kalahari* presents an extreme example of collaboration across communities of interest. Although their training, tools, and values were different, because everyone involved from both groups were designers and makers, it was possible to overcome cultural and language barriers by engaging in crafts together. This, in addition to careful communication in order to convey honest intent, enabled an otherwise impossible meeting of starkly contrasted worldviews, in which unique perspectives on making were exchanged. Nonetheless, this example demonstrated that certain biases may prevent a group so engaged from fully availing themselves of the affordances offered by such a collaboration.

###Autobiographical Design
From *Do-It-Yourself Cellphones*, I take autiobiographical design to refer to a cycle of design-test-analyze-repeat, conducted by a single designer or small group. This is probably the design modality that most of us are the most familiar with, and one in which we are likely to engage by default; we don't need to commit to long excursions or overcome language barriers when we work in isolation, building things for ourselves. We can produce great things this way, but they tend to enforce our inborn and acquired biases. For this reason, I was not surprised that the author reported a low incidence of workshop attendees attempting to modify the electronic circuit of the cellphone.