# February 6th

I have difficulty finding anything to criticize in tinkering as a creative approach to design or production. In their chapter, Resnick and Rosenbaum address some potential critiques: that tinkering doesn't promote deep knowledge, or that it is too disorganized of a process to produce signifficant results. I tend to agree with their point of view that tinkering engenders familiarity with skills and/or concepts that can later be reinforced and connected with one another, and that projects initiated through tinkering frequently take on more structured forms as they develop toward their goals. To me, this indicates that tinkering is a viable, even attractive creative approach at all levels from hobbyist endeavors to professional practices.

I don't see tinkering and planning as totally separate. In my view, tinkering usually precipitates the development of a plan, so that over the lifetime of a project, the work may transition from a state of mostly exploratory tinkering, to a situation in which the results of tinkering inform nascent plans that are successively revised through iteration, and finally to the execution of a plan that realizes the vision that developed throughout the process.

Tinkering importantly also holds educational and creativity-expanding value for the creator, regardless of the success of the artifact produced. When learning a craft, reflection on failure can help us to improve our skills and develop a better command over the parameters of the domain in question. While these experiences are not immediately useful in professional prouction, I would argue that they are the formative experiences that shape expert-level creative practitioners.