# January 16th

One powerful concept from the Papert reading is the notion of the assimilation of knowledge, one which he expanded on from the theorist Piaget. This idea proposes that we all possess intellectual models, based on our knowledge and processes that we already understand, which we rely on for the comprehension of new information and procedures. When we relate easily to a new subject based on the models we have, we learn this subject with relative ease; we may even enjoy it. If we lack an appropriate model, on the other hand, there may be considerable difficulty. The problem of optimizing education, thus becomes one of expanding the repertoire of intellectual models that children have at their disposal, helping them to create connections between and transfer knowledge across disciplines.

I agree with Papert that there are shortcomings in the way that many subjects are taught in school. There is too much emphasis placed on learning arbitrary facts and procedures, which are too abstracted from the experience of a child to be of value to them. What's more important is the development of intuition, from which we learn to test and question our own procedures. Working with computers supports this very well; through programming, we learn to make and evaluate hypotheses, solve problems, and debug our own thinking. The computer's potential for interactivity and simulation shrink the feedback loop between conception and realization to such an extent that we can hone our intuition at increasingly rapid rates. This ideally aids in the creation of new intellectual models, ultimately supporting knowledge acquisition.
