# January 23rd

Last quarter, I collaborated with three other composition students on a piece for telematic performance. Beyond the challenges posed by the constraints of the medium and the limited time that we had to develop the piece, we were faced with the question of how to begin defining our unique contributions to the project in light of the fact that we all belonged to the same Community of Practice. While it was never acknowledged explicitly, I think we all intuitively knew that the collaboration might suffer if we took on too-similar roles.

We resolved this problem by each selecting a specialized task, aligned with one or more of our research interests, that we could contribute to the piece. One of us chose to play pipe organ, another to live-process the sound of the organ, and the third to mix the incoming audio and video signals and prepare them for broadcast. I decided to write a program to display a musical score as it is generated in real time, which would provide the notation for the the organist to read. By sorting ourselves into these micro-fields, we transformed the nature of our collaboration into that of an ad hoc Community of Interest; we now operated as specialists, each the foremost representative of our own domain, working together to optimize an aesthetic problem from the perspective of our adopted area of expertise.

While we each had some experience with eachother's selected subject, the division of labor enforced a sense of trust that each of us was making the best choices for their own contribution to the piece. Yet, since we in reality all belonged to the same CoP, we largely avoided the communication problems that arise from assimilating the ontologies of separate disciplines. Finally, because I created software for someone other than myself, I received the additional benefit of experience collaborating with an end user to solve design problems.