# January 21st

In my composition studies, I've often encountered the dichotomy of "top-down" and "bottom-up" approaches to musical form; the first representing the architectonic, the latter the improvisational. This model supposes that the composer can either design a scaffolding for the work which is later filled with its material, or start with the material first, and through its manipulation discover a form. Seen as representative of a composer's vision and skill, the former model is typically valued higher in mainstream music culture, despite the significance of improvisation in the development of instrumental music and the many compositional forms (e.g. toccata, impromptu, fantasia) it inspired. This obsession with form in the hylomorphic sense was not always a feature of western music; I would estimate that it was a 19th-century development, a time period in which many now-standard formal elements of music culture were codified. Unfortunately, this position sometimes carries a dark undercurrent in the view that improvisational music is a more primitive practice, of which the rejection of jazz by music academia in the first half of the 20th century is one example. Nowadays, there is some pushback against this idea, with improvised music seeing a lot of activity as a field of research in progressive music institutions.

In my view, all compositions exist on a spectrum between improvisational and architectonic. The extremes on either end are, I suspect, uncommon, yet one could conceivably transcribe a spontaneous improvised performance, thus creating a composition which in theory could be indistinguishable from one that was rigorously determined. Personally, I have approached composition both ways, and while the processes feel different initially, in my experience they eventually converge; if you start with a form, you sooner or later need to work out the materials, and vice versa. There is always a feedback loop between the local details and large-scale structure.

In my piece <i>Convergences</i> (2016), I applied a particularly textile (and "bottom-up") approach to composition. I started by selecting the ensemble; I wanted a diverse mix of timbres, and was constrained by the musicians I had accessible for performance. After deciding on violin, flute, and piano, I studied extended techniques on each of these instruments (sounds that can be made that are outside traditional performance practice), and categorized them for each instrument according to descriptive keywords. Using this database as a reference, I then created a form for the work that highlights the areas of sonic similarity among the disparate instrumentation; in so doing, their distinctive characteristics are highlighted. The electronics generate sound based on the instrumental performances, thus amplifying the sense of sonic ambiguity, while extending it also into the spatial domain. Feedback that I received from working directly with the musicians contributed greatly to the final result. I should also mention that since the work calls for performer improvisation, it is somewhat unstable as an artifact.

[<i>Convergences</i>, score](https://drive.google.com/open?id=1AiYSf2yayqJD2oMJH-3UtmACxW2S2CVE)<br>
[<i>Convergences</i>, audio](https://drive.google.com/open?id=1da5T0jt-mk1Is0evQcfm_tlpetPzGs9w)
